\input texinfo
@c %
@c %  /**-----------------------------------------------------------------**
@c %   **                               Clan                              **
@c %   **-----------------------------------------------------------------**
@c %   **                             clan.texi                           **
@c %   **-----------------------------------------------------------------**
@c %   **                 First version: september 10th 2006              **
@c %   **-----------------------------------------------------------------**/
@c %
@c % release 0.0: May 4th 2008
@c %
@c %/**************************************************************************
@c % *               Clan: the Chunky Loop Analyzer (experimental)            *
@c % **************************************************************************/


@c % /*************************************************************************
@c %  *                              PART I: HEADER                           *
@c %  *************************************************************************/
@c %**start of header
@setfilename clan.info
@settitle Clan - a polyhedral representation extractor for high level programs

@set EDITION 1.0
@set VERSION 0.8.1
@set UPDATED April 11th 2017
@c @set UPDATED Coming soon
@setchapternewpage odd

@c % This is to ask for A4 instead of Letter size document.
@iftex
     @afourpaper
@end iftex

@c %**end of header

@c % /*************************************************************************
@c %  *                 PART II: SUMMARY DESCRIPTION AND COPYRIGHT            *
@c %  *************************************************************************/

@copying
This manual is for Clan version @value{VERSION}, a software
which extracts the polyhedral representation of some parts of
high level programs written in C, C++, C# or Java.

It would be quite kind to refer the following paper in any publication that
results from the use of the Clan software or its library (the reason to cite
it is, amongst many other interesting things, it defines what is a @emph{SCoP},
or @emph{static control part}):

@example
@@InProceedings@{Bas03,
@ @ author =@ @ @ @ @{C\'edric Bastoul and Albert Cohen and Sylvain Girbal and
@ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Saurabh Sharma and Olivier Temam@},
@ @ title =@ @ @ @ @ @{Putting Polyhedral Loop Transformations to Work@},
@ @ booktitle =@ @{LCPC'16 International Workshop on Languages and
@ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ Compilers for Parallel Computers, LNCS 2958@},
@ @ pages =@ @ @ @ @ @{209--225@},
@ @ month =@ @ @ @ @ @{october@},
@ @ year =@ @ @ @ @ @ 2003,
@ @ address =@ @ @ @{College Station, Texas@}
@}
@end example

Copyright @copyright{} 2012 C@'edric Bastoul.

@c quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2
published by the Free Software Foundation. To receive a copy of the
GNU Free Documentation License, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307 USA.
@c end quotation
@end copying

@c % /*************************************************************************
@c %  *                 PART III: TITLEPAGE, CONTENTS, COPYRIGHT              *
@c %  *************************************************************************/
@titlepage
@title Clan
@subtitle A Polyhedral Representation Extractor for High Level Programs
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for Clan @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author C@'edric Bastoul

@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of contents at the beginning.
@contents

@c % /*************************************************************************
@c %  *                     PART IV: TOP NODE AND MASTER MENU                 *
@c %  *************************************************************************/
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Clan

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* Clan Software::
* Clan Library::
@c * Hacking::
* Installing::
* Documentation::
* Development::
* References::
@end menu



@c % /*************************************************************************
@c %  *                       PART V: BODY OF THE DOCUMENT                    *
@c %  *************************************************************************/

@c %  ****************************** INTRODUCTION ******************************
@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
Clan is a free software and library which translates some particular parts of
high level programs written in C, C++, C# or Java into a polyhedral
representation, namely OpenScop (@pxref{Bas12}).
This representation may be manipulated by other tools to, e.g., achieve
complex analyses or program restructurations (for optimization,
parallelization or any other kind of manipulation).
It has been created to avoid tedious and
error-prone input file writing for polyhedral tools (such as CLooG, LeTSeE,
Candl etc.). Using Clan, the user has to deal with source codes based on C
grammar only (as C, C++, C# or Java).

Clan stands for @emph{Chunky Loop ANalyzer}: it is a part of the Chunky
project, a research tool for data locality improvement (@pxref{Bas03a}).
It is designed to be the front-end of any source-to-source automatic optimizers
and/or parallelizers. The OpenScop output format has been chosen to be polyhedral
library independent, so Clan may integrate any polyhedral compilation
framework easily. Clan has been successfuly integrated to
PoCC (@url{http://pocc.sourceforge.net}) and Pluto
(@url{http://pluto-compiler.sourceforge.net}) high-level compilers.
The OpenScop format for polyhedral
representation of programs, as well as an introduction to the polyhedral model
for dummies, is presented in an external document, @pxref{Bas12}. If the
reader is not familiar with such a representation, we highly recommend him/her
to read that document first.

Clan is a very basic tool since it is only a translator from a given program
representation to another representation. Nevertheless the current version is
still under evaluation, and there is no guarantee that the upward compatibility
will be respected, even if we do think so. A lot of reports are necessary
to freeze the library API and it is much probable that Clan will accept
larger and larger subsets of C over time (which should not introduce upward
compatibility problem). You are very welcome and encouraged to send reports
on bugs, wishes, critics, comments, suggestions or (please !) successful
experiences to @email{clan-development@@googlegroups.com}.


@c %  *********************** Using the Clan Software **************************
@node Clan Software
@chapter Using the Clan Software

@menu
* A First Example::
* Writing The Input File::
* Reading The Output File::
* Calling Clan::
* Clan Options::
@end menu

@c %/*************************************************************************
@c % *                              A FIRST EXAMPLE                          *
@c % *************************************************************************/
@node A First Example
@section A First Example
Clan takes as input a source code file than can be written in either C or
C++ or C# or Java (or any other imperative language close enough
to C). It translates some parts of the program to a polyhedral, matrix-based,
representation called OpenScop.
We call such a program part a @emph{static control part}, or SCoP fo short.

Clan can find automatically the program parts that it is able to translate.
However, as it will be detailed momentarily, to be a real SCoP, those code
parts must have some properties which are beyond the analysis power of Clan
(like pointer alias or function side-effects analysis).
More complex tools like the GRAPHITE
framework of GCC (@url{http://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/Graphite}) or the Polly
framework of LLVM (@url{http://polly.grosser.es}) are devoted to such a
complex, highly technical problem. Using Clan, the user should rather specify
thanks to pragmas where begin the SCoPs to process, and where they finish.

For instance, let us consider the following source code in C of a matrix-matrix
multiply program that reads two matrices, achieves the multiply then prints
the result. Let us also consider that the user is only interested in the
matrix-matrix multiply kernel:

@example
/* matmul.c 128*128 matrix multiply */
#include <stdio.h>
#define N 128

int main() @{
  int   i,j,k;
  float a[N][N], b[N][N], c[N][N];

  /* We read matrix a then matrix b */
  for (i = 0; i < N; i++)
    for (j = 0; j < N; j++)
      scanf(" %f",&a[i][j]);
  for (i = 0; i < N; i++)
    for (j = 0; j < N; j++)
      scanf(" %f",&b[i][j]);

  /* c = a * b */
#pragma scop
  for (i = 0; i < N; i++)
    for (j = 0; j < N; j++) @{
      c[i][j] = 0.0;
      for (k = 0; k < N; k++)
        c[i][j] = c[i][j] + a[i][k]*b[k][j];
    @}
#pragma endscop

  /* We print matrix c */
  for (i = 0; i < N; i++) @{
    for (j = 0; j < N; j++)
      printf("%6.2f ",c[i][j]);
    printf("\n");
  @}

  return 0;
@}
@end example

The tags to ask Clan to consider a given part of the code are provided thanks
to the pragmas @code{#pragma scop} and  @code{#pragma endscop}. It can have
different forms depending on the input language. This is explained in
a further section (@pxref{Writing The Input File}).

This source code file may be called @samp{matmul.c}
(this example is provided in the Clan distribution as
@code{test/matmul.c}) and we can ask Clan to process it
and to generate the polyhedral representation by a simple call to Clan
with this file as input: @samp{clan matmul.c}. By default, Clan will print
the OpenScop polyhedral representation on the standard output:

@example
# [File Generated by Clan 0.7.0]
<OpenScop>

# =============================================== Global
# Language
C

# Context
CONTEXT
0 3 0 0 0 1

# Parameters are provided
1
<strings>
N
</strings>

# Number of statements
2

# =============================================== Statement 1
# Number of relations describing the statement:
3

# ----------------------------------------------  1.1 Domain
DOMAIN
4 5 2 0 0 1
# e/i| i   j | N | 1  
   1   1   0   0   0    ## i >= 0
   1  -1   0   1  -1    ## -i+N-1 >= 0
   1   0   1   0   0    ## j >= 0
   1   0  -1   1  -1    ## -j+N-1 >= 0

# ----------------------------------------------  1.2 Scattering
SCATTERING
5 10 5 2 0 1
# e/i|s1  s2  s3  s4  s5 | i   j | N | 1  
   0  -1   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0    ## s1 == 0
   0   0  -1   0   0   0   1   0   0   0    ## s2 == i
   0   0   0  -1   0   0   0   0   0   0    ## s3 == 0
   0   0   0   0  -1   0   0   1   0   0    ## s4 == j
   0   0   0   0   0  -1   0   0   0   0    ## s5 == 0

# ----------------------------------------------  1.3 Access
WRITE
3 8 3 2 0 1
# e/i|Arr [1] [2]| i   j | N | 1  
   0  -1   0   0   0   0   0   1    ## Arr == c
   0   0  -1   0   1   0   0   0    ## [1] == i
   0   0   0  -1   0   1   0   0    ## [2] == j

# ----------------------------------------------  1.4 Body
# Statement body is provided
1
<body>
# Number of original iterators
2
# List of original iterators
i j
# Statement body expression
c[i][j] = 0.0;
</body>

# =============================================== Statement 2
# Number of relations describing the statement:
6

# ----------------------------------------------  2.1 Domain
DOMAIN
6 6 3 0 0 1
# e/i| i   j   k | N | 1  
   1   1   0   0   0   0    ## i >= 0
   1  -1   0   0   1  -1    ## -i+N-1 >= 0
   1   0   1   0   0   0    ## j >= 0
   1   0  -1   0   1  -1    ## -j+N-1 >= 0
   1   0   0   1   0   0    ## k >= 0
   1   0   0  -1   1  -1    ## -k+N-1 >= 0

# ----------------------------------------------  2.2 Scattering
SCATTERING
7 13 7 3 0 1
# e/i|s1  s2  s3  s4  s5  s6  s7 | i   j   k | N | 1  
   0  -1   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0    ## s1 == 0
   0   0  -1   0   0   0   0   0   1   0   0   0   0    ## s2 == i
   0   0   0  -1   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0    ## s3 == 0
   0   0   0   0  -1   0   0   0   0   1   0   0   0    ## s4 == j
   0   0   0   0   0  -1   0   0   0   0   0   0   1    ## s5 == 1
   0   0   0   0   0   0  -1   0   0   0   1   0   0    ## s6 == k
   0   0   0   0   0   0   0  -1   0   0   0   0   0    ## s7 == 0

# ----------------------------------------------  2.3 Access
WRITE
3 9 3 3 0 1
# e/i|Arr [1] [2]| i   j   k | N | 1  
   0  -1   0   0   0   0   0   0   1    ## Arr == c
   0   0  -1   0   1   0   0   0   0    ## [1] == i
   0   0   0  -1   0   1   0   0   0    ## [2] == j

READ
3 9 3 3 0 1
# e/i|Arr [1] [2]| i   j   k | N | 1  
   0  -1   0   0   0   0   0   0   1    ## Arr == c
   0   0  -1   0   1   0   0   0   0    ## [1] == i
   0   0   0  -1   0   1   0   0   0    ## [2] == j

READ
3 9 3 3 0 1
# e/i|Arr [1] [2]| i   j   k | N | 1  
   0  -1   0   0   0   0   0   0   2    ## Arr == a
   0   0  -1   0   1   0   0   0   0    ## [1] == i
   0   0   0  -1   0   0   1   0   0    ## [2] == k

READ
3 9 3 3 0 1
# e/i|Arr [1] [2]| i   j   k | N | 1  
   0  -1   0   0   0   0   0   0   3    ## Arr == b
   0   0  -1   0   0   0   1   0   0    ## [1] == k
   0   0   0  -1   0   1   0   0   0    ## [2] == j

# ----------------------------------------------  2.4 Body
# Statement body is provided
1
<body>
# Number of original iterators
3
# List of original iterators
i j k
# Statement body expression
c[i][j] = c[i][j] + a[i][k]*b[k][j];
</body>

</OpenScop>
@end example

We will not describe here the structure and the components of this
output. This is done in depth in a separated document, along with
a complete introduction to the polyhedral representation of programs
for the dummies (@pxref{Bas12}). This file format, called @code{OpenScop} has
been designed to be the possible input file format of most polyhedral tools.
If you have the minimum knowledge about the polyhedral representation
of programs, you should probably already feel familiar with this file format.


@c %/*************************************************************************
@c % *                                Input file                             *
@c % *************************************************************************/
@node Writing The Input File
@section Writing The Input File

@menu
* SCoP Pragmas::
* Semantical Restrictions::
* Syntactical Restrictions::
@end menu

The input file of Clan is a source code written in any language based on
C for the @code{for} loop, the @code{if} and for the array accesses.
C, C++, Java and C# are good examples that should work pretty well with Clan,
as long as the code parts to translate would be correct in C.
Clan will only translate program parts which must respect syntactical and
semantical restrictions over plain C, and which are delimited with specific
pragmas. Those pragmas and restrictions are detailed in the next sections.

@node SCoP Pragmas
@subsection SCoP Pragmas
The input file may contain several code parts to translate delimited
@strong{by the user} thanks to pragmas. Those pragmas indicate to Clan
which program parts needs to be translated, and more important, which
program parts can be translated to a polyhedral representation.
We call them SCoPs (for Static Control Parts). Those parts must respect
several syntactical and semantical properties which ensure an easy and safe
translation to a polyhedral representation.

In C, C++ and C#, the pragma to tag the beginning of a SCoP is:
@example
@group
#pragma scop
@end group
@end example
@noindent and the pragma to tag the end of a SCoP is:
@example
@group
#pragma endscop
@end group
@end example

In Java, the pragma to tag the beginning of a SCoP is:
@example
@group
/*@@ scop */
@end group
@end example
@noindent and the pragma to tag the end of a SCoP is:
@example
@group
/*@@ end scop */
@end group
@end example

Clan trusts the user: it will not check hardly whether a program part to
translate is actually a SCoP or not. It will only try to translate the program
part to a polyhedral representation. If there is a syntactical issue, it will
complain and try to provide the user with some hints about the problem. If
there is a semantical issue, it will not detect it. Hence, SCoP pragmas must
be placed with caution.

@node Semantical Restrictions
@subsection Semantical Restrictions

There are a few but very important semantical restrictions a program part
between SCoP pragmas must satisfy:
@itemize @bullet
@item All functions called within the SCoP are pure, i.e., they work only
      with their respective input parameters and local variables and have
      no side effects, e.g., they will not use a global variable or
      step outside array boundaries.
@item No aliasing of array names is possible within the SCoP, e.g., if two
      arrays (or pointers) refer to the same memory location, they must
      have different names.
@item Pointer references behave like variables or arrays, e.g., function
      pointers are not allowed.
@end itemize
Clan doesn't have (and will much probably never have) the analysis power
to check for those properties, hence, it is the responsibility of the
user to ensure they are satisfied. The action of setting the SCoP pragmas
states explicitely that they are respected. If they are not, Clan's
behavior is undefined.

@node Syntactical Restrictions
@subsection Syntactical Restrictions

@menu
* Loop Initialization::
* Loop and if Condition::
* Loop Step::
* Array Subscript::
@end menu

Clan only accepts a subset of C between SCoP pragmas. The big picture is,
Clan is able to translate loop-based codes where loop bounds, @code{if}
conditions and array subscripts are made of affine expressions involving
only outer loop iterators, integer constants (a.k.a. parameters) and
integer literals. The following general restrictions apply to all the
code between SCoP pragmas:
@itemize @bullet
@item The only allowed control keywords are @code{for}, @code{while},
      @code{if} and @code{else}, with restrictions as described below.
@item Declarations are not allowed.
@item Any C instruction without control keywords is accepted, with
      restrictions for array subscripts as described below.
@end itemize

More specific restrictions apply to the control statements and the
array subscript. They refer to affine expressions and specific operators:
@itemize @bullet
@item Affine expressions are additive forms of loop iterators
      (e.g., @code{i}), parameters (e.g., @code{N}) and integers, with
      integer coefficients, e.g., @code{7*i + 13*N + 42}. Expressions
      which simplify to affine forms are accepted as valid affine
      expresions, e.g., @code{3*(i*2 + N)}, as long as the only operators
      in such expressions are @code{+}, @code{-} and @code{*}.
@item Four particular operators may be used in some expressions: (1) the
      @code{max} operator returns the maximum between an affine
      expression or a @code{max} expression and another affine expression
      or @code{max} expression, e.g., @code{max(i+1,max(j,n))} is
      possible. (2) The @code{min} operator works like the @code{max}
      operator but for minimum. (3) The @code{ceild} operator gives
      the integer ceiling of an affine expression divided by an integer,
      e.g., @code{ceild(2*i+n, 3)} is a correct use or the operator.
      (4) The @code{floord} operator gives the integer floor of an affine
      expression divided by an integer, e.g., @code{floord(2*i+n, 3)} is
      a correct use of the operator.
@end itemize

Four specific zones in SCoP codes are restricted:
@example
for (initialization; condition; step)
  if (condition)
    ... [subscript] ...
@end example

@itemize @bullet
@item the first part of @code{for} loop expressions, called loop initialization,
@item the second part of @code{for} loop expressions, called loop condition, and
      the condition of @code{if} conditionals, share the same kind of restriction,
@item the third part of @code{for} loop expressions, called loop step,
@item the array subscripts.
@end itemize
Those restrictions are detailed in the next sections.

@node Loop Initialization
@subsubsection Loop Initialization
Each loop initialization must be an assignment of the loop counter such that the
right hand side is one or several affine expressions aggregated with @code{max}
(resp. @code{min}) operators if the loop step is positive (resp. negative).
Optionally, the loop iterator can be declared (as an @code{int}) in the loop
initialization part.

For instance:
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{j = 3*i + 2*N} is correct.
@item @code{int j = 3*i + 2*N} is correct.
@item @code{j = ceild(i + N, 10)} is correct if the @code{j}-loop step is positive.
@item @code{j = max(i, ceild(N, 3))} is correct if the @code{j}-loop step is positive.
@item @code{j = min(min(N,10), 7*i)} is correct if the @code{j}-loop step is negative.
@item @code{j = min(max(i, 1), N)} is NOT correct: mixed @code{min} and @code{max}.
@end itemize

@node Loop and if Condition
@subsubsection Loop and @code{if} Condition

Each loop or @code{if} condition must be a (composition of) constraint(s) on
affine expressions only.
@itemize @bullet
@item Supported C operators are @code{>}, @code{>=}, @code{<}, @code{<=},
      @code{==}, @code{!=}, @code{!}, @code{&&} and @code{||}.
@item @code{min} and @code{max} operators can be used to aggregate expressions
      in @code{>}, @code{>=}, @code{<} and @code{<=} constraints. @code{min}
      (resp. @code{max}) expressions must be in the greater (resp. lower)
      side of the constraints.
@item Constraints involving the modulo operator are possible in the following
      form only: let @code{a} be an affine expression and @code{x} and @code{y} two
      positive integers, then the condition @code{(a % x == y)} is accepted.
@item Function calls alone can be used as valid @code{if} conditions.
@end itemize

For instance:
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{i + 2*j < N} is correct.
@item @code{max(i, j) < floord(N, 7)} is correct.
@item @code{N>i && !(j>0 || N!=1)} is correct.
@item @code{((2*i+1)%3 == 1) && i>j} is correct.
@item @code{func(A[i], b)} is correct in a @code{if} condition.
@item @code{min(2*i, N) < 0} is NOT correct: @code{min} on the lower side.
@item @code{i + 2} is NOT correct: use @code{(i + 2) != 0} instead.
@end itemize

@node Loop Step
@subsubsection Loop Step
Updating the loop iterator is only allowed in the loop step part.
It must be done by adding an integer to the previous
iterator value. Let @code{i} be a loop iterator and @code{x} an integer
(a literal like @code{42}, not an integer variable),
the following forms are accepted for the loop step part:
@code{i++}, @code{++i}, @code{i--}, @code{--i}, @code{i += x}, @code{i -= x},
@code{i = i+x} and @code{i = i-x}. The iterator can optionally be enclosed
in parentheses in this part: @code{++(i)}.

@node Array Subscript
@subsubsection Array Subscript
Array subscripts must be affine expressions.



@c %/*************************************************************************
@c % *                               Output file                             *
@c % *************************************************************************/
@node Reading The Output File
@section Reading The Output File

The output text file of Clan provides an explicit polyhedral representation of
a static control part. The output file format is OpenScop, @pxref{Bas12}.
It has been designed by various researchers in polyhedral compilation from
various institutions. It builds on previous popular polyhedral file formats
like @emph{.cloog} to provide a unique, extensible file format to every
polyhedral compilation tools (including CLooG) while
being polyhedral library independent. To guarantee an up-to-date
information, the reader is invited to read the OpenScop document
directly @pxref{Bas12}.



@c %/*************************************************************************
@c % *                              Calling Clan                             *
@c % *************************************************************************/
@node Calling Clan
@section Calling Clan
Clan is called by the following command:
@example
       clan [ options | file... ]
@end example
The default behavior of Clan is to read the input source code from a file and
to print the generated OpenScop file on the standard output.
Clan's behavior and the output file are under the user control thanks
to some options which will be detailed momentarily (@pxref{Clan Options}).
@code{file} is the input file list (Clan may extract SCoPs from several input files).
@code{stdin} is a special value: when used, input is the standard input and no
other input file can be provided. For instance, we can call Clan to process the
input file @code{basic.c} with default options by typing:
@code{clan basic.c} or @code{more basic.c | clan stdin}
(usual @code{more basic.c | clan -} works too).


@c %/*************************************************************************
@c % *                              Clan Options                             *
@c % *************************************************************************/
@node Clan Options
@section Clan Options

@menu
* Output::
* Autoscop::
* Autopragma::
* Autoinsert::
* Inputscop::
* Precision::
* Bounded Context::
* No Loop Context::
* No Domain Simplify::
* Extbody::
* Help::
* Version ::
@end menu

@node Output
@subsection Output @code{-o <output>}

     @code{-o <output>}: this option sets the output file. @code{stdout} is a
     special value: when used, output is standard output.
     Default value is @code{stdout}.

@node Autoscop
@subsection Autoscop @code{-autoscop}

@code{-autoscop}: this option asks Clan to automatically find SCoPs within
the input souce file. This options should be used with care because Clan
will only ensure the syntactical restrictions are respected
(@pxref{Semantical Restrictions}), but not the semantical restrictions
(@pxref{Semantical Restrictions}). If the input file already contains
SCoP pragmas, this option will leave them unmodified (as a consequence
it will not be possible to include the user-SCoPs to larger automatically
detected SCoPs).

@node Autopragma
@subsection Autopragma @code{-autopragma}

@code{-autopragma}: this option asks Clan to automatically generate a
copy of the input file with SCoP pragmas inserted around
automatically detected SCoPs. This options works in the same way
as Autoscop (@pxref{Autoscop}), but outputs a code instead of the
OpenScop representation.

@node Autoinsert
@subsection Autoinsert @code{-autoinsert}

@code{-autoinsert}: this option is equivalent to @code{-autopragma}
but it inserts SCoP pragmas directly in the input file. Use with care:
check with @code{-autopragma} first.

@node Inputscop
@subsection Inputscop @code{-inputscop}

@code{-inputscop}: this option asks Clan to use an OpenScop input
instead of a source code (this is supposed to be a pass-through
process).

@node Precision
@subsection Precision @code{-precision <value>}

@code{-precision}: this option asks Clan to work using a given
precision for the various integer elements, @code{value} may be
@code{32} for 32 bits, @code{64} for 64 bits (the default) or
@code{0} fot GMP (the installed OpenScop library must have been
compiled with GMP support for this option to apply).

@node Bounded Context
@subsection Bounded Context @code{-boundedctxt}

@code{-boundedctxt}: this option asks Clan to generate context
relations such that every parameter is considered to be >= -1.

@node No Loop Context
@subsection No Loop Context @code{-noloopctxt}

@code{-noloopctxt}: this option asks Clan to avoid generating
additional constraints to ensure the initial values of the loop
iterators respect the loop conditions. This option allows to
generate simpler iteration domains, however it should be
used with care. For instance without this option, a loop such
as @code{for (i = 0; i > 2; i++)} cannot be detected as an
empty loop.

@node No Domain Simplify
@subsection No Domain Simplify @code{-nosimplify}

@code{-nosimplify}: this option asks Clan to avoid trying to
simplify the iteration domains. Clan is not linked to a polyhedral
library, hence it is just able to remove trivially redundant
constraints and union parts. However, for debugging or time
saving reason, this step can be disabled using this option.

@node Extbody
@subsection Extbody @code{-extbody}

@code{-extbody}: this option asks Clan to use the extbody extension
(see OpenScop's documentation) instead of the basic body for
each statement.

@node Help
@subsection Help @code{--help} or @code{-h}

     @code{--help} or @code{-h}: this option asks Clan to print a short help.

@node Version
@subsection Version @code{--version} or @code{-v}

     @code{--version} or @code{-v}: this option asks Clan to print some
     release and version informations.


@c %/*************************************************************************
@c % *                            Clan Library                               *
@c % *************************************************************************/
@node Clan Library
@chapter Using the Clan Library
The Clan Library was implemented to allow the user to call Clan
directly from his programs, without file accesses or system calls. The
user only needs to link his programs with C libraries. The Clan
library mainly provides one function (@code{clan_scop_extract})
which takes as input the source code file to process with some options,
and returns the data structure corresponding
to the SCoP (an @code{osl_scop_t} structure from the OpenScop Library
Clan depends on) which contains the polyhedral representation of the SCoP.
Some other functions are provided for convenience reasons.

@menu
* Clan Data Structures::
* Clan Functions::
* Example of Library Use::
@end menu


@node Clan Data Structures
@section Clan Data Structures Description
In this section, we describe the data structures relevant for an user
to use Clan as a library.  As this is not a developer's
guide, data structure devoted to internal use as well as internal use
fields are not described here.

@menu
* clan_options_t::
@end menu

@node clan_options_t
@subsection clan_options_t

@example
@group
struct clan_options @{
  char * name ;   /* Name of the input file */
  int castle;     /* 1 to print the Clan Castle, 0 otherwise */
  int structure;  /* 1 to dump the SCoP structure, 0 otherwise */
  int autoscop;   /* 1 to extract SCoPs automatically, 0 otherwise */
  int autopragma; /* 1 to insert SCoP pragmas in the code, 0 otherwise */
  int inputscop;  /* 1 to read an OpenScop file, 0 for a source code */
  int precision;  /* 0 for GMP, 32 for 32 bits, 64 for 64 bits */
  int bounded_context; /* 1 to set all parameters to >= -1, 0 otherwise */
@};
typedef struct clan_options   clan_options_t;
typedef struct clan_options * clan_options_p;
@end group
@end example

@noindent The @code{clan_options_t} structure contains all the possible
options to rule Clan's behaviour (@pxref{Calling Clan}).  
The default values for the various fields set by the
@code{clan_options_malloc()} function
(@pxref{Allocation and Initialization Functions}) are the following:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{name}: NULL.
@item @code{castle}: 1 (do print the castle).
@item @code{structure}: 0 (do not dump the internal data structure).
@item @code{autoscop}: 0 (automatic SCoP extraction disabled).
@item @code{autopragma}: 0 (automatic pragma insertion disabled).
@item @code{inputscop}: 0 (read a source file by default).
@item @code{precision}: 64 (use 64 bits precision by default).
@item @code{bounded_context}: 0 (ubounded parameters by default).
@end itemize

@node Clan Functions
@section Clan Functions Description

@menu
* clan_scop_extract::
* clan_scop_insert_pragmas::
* clan_scop_print::
* Allocation and Initialization Functions::
* Memory Deallocation Functions::
* Printing Functions::
@end menu


@node clan_scop_extract
@subsection clan_scop_extract
@example
@group
osl_scop_p clan_scop_extract(FILE * input, clan_options_p options);
@end group
@end example

@noindent The @code{clan_scop_extract} function extracts the polyhedral
representation of a SCoP in the file provided thanks to the @code{input}
pointer (the file, possibly @code{stdin}, has to be open for reading),
according to some options
provided thanks to the pointer @code{options} to a @code{clan_options_t}
data structure (@pxref{clan_options_t}). It returns a pointer to the
extracted SCoP, translated into
an @code{osl_scop_t} data structure (@pxref{Bas12}).

@node clan_scop_insert_pragmas
@subsection clan_scop_insert_pragmas
@example
@group
void clan_scop_insert_pragmas(osl_scop_p scop, char* file, int test);
@end group
@end example

@noindent The @code{clan_scop_insert_pragmas} function inserts SCoP
pragmas (@code{#pragma scop} and @code{#pragma endscop}) in the file
named @code{file} around the SCoPs described in the @code{scop} list,
except if they are already surrounded with such pragmas. The boolean
@code{test}, when set to 1, allows to only test the function and to
generate a temporary file (the name of the file is in the
@code{CLAN_AUTOPRAGMA} file) instead of modifying @code{file}.

@node clan_scop_print
@subsection clan_scop_print
@example
@group
void clan_scop_print (
  FILE * output,
  osl_scop_p scop,
  clan_options_p options
);
@end group
@end example

@noindent The function @code{clan_scop_print} is a pretty printer for
@code{osl_scop_t} structures. It dumps the @code{scop} informations in
OpenScop format (@pxref{Bas12}) in the file provided thanks to
the pointer @code{output} (the file, possibly @code{stdout}, has to be open
for writing), according to some options provided thanks to the pointer
@code{options} to a @code{clan_options_t} data structure
(@pxref{clan_options_t}).


@node Allocation and Initialization Functions
@subsection Allocation and Initialization Functions
@example
clan_structure_p clan_structure_malloc();
@end example
@noindent Each Clan data structure has an allocation and initialization
function as shown above, where @code{structure} has to
be replaced by the name of the convenient structure (without @samp{clan}
prefix and @samp{_t} suffix) for
instance @code{clan_options_p clan_options_malloc();}. These functions return
pointers to an allocated structure with fields set to convenient default
values. @strong{Using those functions is mandatory} to support internal
management fields and to avoid upward compatibility problems if
new fields appear.


@node Memory Deallocation Functions
@subsection Memory Deallocation Functions
@example
void clan_structure_free(clan_structure_p);
@end example
@noindent Each Clan data structure has a deallocation function as shown above,
where @code{structure} have to
be replaced by the name of the convenient structure (without @samp{clan}
prefix and @samp{_t} suffix) for
instance @code{void clan_options_free(clan_options_p);}. These functions
free the allocated memory for the structure provided as input. They free
memory recursively, i.e. they also free the allocated memory for the internal
structures.
@strong{Using those functions is mandatory} to avoid memory leaks on internal
management fields and to avoid upward compatibility problems if
new fields appear.


@node Printing Functions
@subsection Printing Functions
@example
void clan_structure_print(FILE *, clan_structure_p) ;
@end example
@noindent Each Clan data structure has a printing function as shown above,
where @code{structure} have to
be replaced by the name of the convenient structure (without @samp{clan}
prefix and @samp{_t} suffix) for
instance @code{void clan_options_print(FILE *, clan_options_p);}. These functions
print the pointed structure (and its fields recursively) to the file provided
as input (the file, possibly @code{stdout}, has to be open
for writing).


@node Example of Library Use
@section Example of Library Use
Here is a basic example showing how it is possible to use the Clan library,
assuming that a standard installation has been done (note that this includes
installing the OpenScop Library, @code{osl}, @pxref{Installing}).
The following C program reads a source code input file on the standard input,
then prints the solution on the standard output.
Options are preselected to the default values of the Clan software.
@example
/* example.c */
# include <stdio.h>
# include <osl/osl.h>
# include <clan/clan.h>

int main() @{
  osl_scop_p scop;
  clan_options_p options;

  /* Default option setting. */
  options = clan_options_malloc() ;

  /* Extraction of the SCoP. */
  scop = clan_scop_extract(stdin, options);

  /* Output of the OpenScop file. */
  osl_scop_print(stdout, scop);

  /* Save the planet. */
  clan_options_free(options);
  osl_scop_free(scop);

  return 0;
@}
@end example

@noindent The compilation command could be:
@example
gcc example.c -lclan -o example
@end example
@noindent A calling command with the input file test.c could be:
@example
more test.c | ./example
@end example


@c %  ****************************** INSTALLING ********************************
@node Installing
@chapter Installing Clan

@menu
* License::
* Requirements::
* Basic Installation::
* Optional Features::
* Uninstallation::
@end menu

@node License
@section License
First of all, it would be very kind to refer the following paper in any
publication that result from the use of the Clan software or its library,
@pxref{Bas03} (a bibtex entry is provided behind the title page of this
manual, along with copyright notice).

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation,
either version 3 of the  License, or (at your option) any later version.
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
@code{http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/lgpl.html}


@node Requirements
@section Requirements


Clan relies on the OpenScop Library, or @code{osl} for everything related to
the OpenScop format. For convenience, an embedded version of osl is
bundled along with Clan so it is not necessary for the user to do any
additional step to install osl. However it is obviously possible to use
an already installed version of osl as long as it is recent enough for
Clan needs.


@menu
* OpenScop Library::
@end menu

@node OpenScop Library
@subsection OpenScop Library (bundled)

OpenScop is a simple, polyhedral-library independent format to ease
polyhedral representation transfers between the various elements of
a polyhedral framework. The OpenScop Library, or @code{osl}, is an
implementation of the OpenScop standard with utility functions. It can
be freely downloaded from @url{http://www.lri.fr/~bastoul}. Since
a convenient version of osl is bundled in Clan, it is not necessary to
install it. However a user may wish to use a separate installation of
osl. The user can compile it by typing the following commands on the
osl root directory:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{./configure}
@item @code{make}
@item And as root: @code{make install}
@end itemize

The osl default installation is @code{/usr/local}. This directory may
not be inside your library path. To fix the problem, the user should set
@example
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$LD_LIBRARY_PATH:/usr/local/lib
@end example
@noindent if your shell is, e.g., bash or
@example
setenv LD_LIBRARY_PATH $LD_LIBRARY_PATH:/usr/local/lib
@end example
@noindent if your shell is, e.g., tcsh. Add the line to your .bashrc or .tcshrc (or
whatever convenient file) to make this change permanent. Another solution
is to ask osl to install in the standard path by using the prefix
option of the configure script:
@samp{./configure --prefix=/usr}.

Clan has to be built using the osl library by specifying the convenient
configure script options (@pxref{Optional Features}).

@node Basic Installation
@section Clan Basic Installation

Once downloaded and unpacked
(e.g. using the @samp{tar -zxvf clan-@value{VERSION}.tar.gz} command),
you can compile Clan by typing the following commands on the Clan's root
directory:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{./configure}
@item @code{make}
@item And as root: @code{make install}
@end itemize

The program binaries and object files can be removed from the
source code directory by typing @code{make clean}. To also remove the
files that the @code{configure} script created (so you can compile the
package for a different kind of computer) type @code{make distclean}.

@node Optional Features
@section Optional Features
The @code{configure} shell script attempts to guess correct values for
various system-dependent variables and user options used during compilation.
It uses those values to create the @code{Makefile}. Various user options
are provided by the Clan's configure script. They are summarized in the
following list and may be printed by typing @code{./configure --help} in the
Clan top-level directory.

@itemize @bullet
@item By default, the installation directory is @code{/usr/local}:
@code{make install} will install the package's files in
@code{/usr/local/bin}, @code{/usr/local/lib} and @code{/usr/local/include}.
The user can specify an installation prefix other than @code{/usr/local} by
giving @code{configure} the option @code{--prefix=PATH}.

@item By default,
@code{configure} will use the bundled OpenScop Library (osl).
Using the @code{--with-osl} option of @code{configure}
the user can specify that @code{no} osl,
a previously installed (@code{system}) osl, a @code{bundled} osl, or a
@code{build} osl should be used.
In the latter case, the user should also specify the build location
using @code{--with-osl-builddir=PATH}.
In case of an installed osl,
the installation location can be specified using the
@code{--with-osl-prefix=PATH} and
@code{--with-osl-exec-prefix=PATH} options of @code{configure}.
@end itemize

@node Uninstallation
@section Uninstallation
The user can easily remove the Clan software and library from his system
by typing (as root if necessary) from the Clan top-level directory
@code{make uninstall}.

@c %  **************************** DOCUMENTATION ******************************
@node Documentation
@chapter Documentation
The Clan distribution provides several documentation sources. First, the
source code itself is as documented as possible. The code comments use a
Doxygen-compatible presentation (something similar to what JavaDoc does for
JAVA). The user may install Doxygen
(see @code{http://www.stack.nl/~dimitri/doxygen}) to automatically
generate a technical documentation by typing @code{make doc} or
@code{doxygen ./autoconf/Doxyfile} at the Clan top-level directory after
running the configure script (@pxref{Installing}). Doxygen will generate
documentation sources (in HTML, LaTeX and man) in the @code{doc/source}
directory of the Clan distribution.

The Texinfo sources of the present document are also provided in the @code{doc}
directory. You can build it in PDF format
(by typing @code{texi2pdf clan.texi} or @code{make pdf}) or HTML format
(by typing @code{makeinfo --html clan.texi}, using @code{--no-split}
option to generate a single HTML file) or info format
(by typing @code{makeinfo clan.texi}).

@c %  **************************** DEVELOPPING ********************************
@node Development
@chapter Development

@menu
* Copyright Issue::
* Repository::
* Coding Style::
@end menu

@node Copyright Issue 
@section Copyright Issue

Clan is an Open Source project and you should feel free to contribute by adding
functionalities, correcting bugs or improving documentation. However, for
painful administrative reasons, the copyright should not be impacted by your work.
Hence, if you are doing a significant contribution to
the main part, Clan's maintainer may ask you for an agreement
about this copyright. If you plan to do such a significant contribution, it
may be wise to discuss this issue with the maintainer first.

@node Repository 
@section Repository

The main repository of Clan is
@url{http://repo.or.cz/w/clan.git}. Developers may ask Clan's
maintainer to open them a write access to this repository. Only the maintainer
should ever change the @code{master} branch. Developers should work on their
own branches. To avoid any problem developers should use the @emph{fork}
functionality of the repository.

@node Coding Style 
@section Coding Style  

Clan is written in C using an object oriented style. Each
important data structure (e.g., @code{struct foo}) has its own header file
(@code{include/clan/foo.h}) where lies the definition of
the data structure, the two typedefs for the data structure (one for the
structure, @code{clan_foo_t}, and one for a pointer
to the structure, @code{clan_foo_p}), the prototypes of the various
functions related to this data structure, all named using the
prefix "@code{clan_foo_}". The source code of the functions is provided in a
separated C file (@code{source/foo.c}).
  
Utility functions independent from the main data structures may be placed in
separate source files (e.g., definition in @code{include/clan/util.h}
and code in @code{source/util.c}). Tool-wide preprocessor directives are
placed in @code{include/clan/macros.h}, macros are prefixed with
"@code{CLAN_}".

The core code itself has to be written according to the Google C++ Coding Style:
@url{http://google-styleguide.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/cppguide.xml} (for
what can apply to C), plus the naming conventions discussed above with
highest priority.


@c %  ****************************** REFERENCES ********************************
@node References
@chapter References

@itemize
@item
@anchor{Bas03a}[Bas03a] C. Bastoul, P. Feautrier. Improving data locality
by chunking. CC'12 International Conference on Compiler Construction,
LNCS 2622, pages 320-335, Warsaw, april 2003.

@item
@anchor{Bas03}[Bas03] C. Bastoul and A. Cohen and S. Girbal and
S. Sharma and O. Temam. Putting Polyhedral Loop Transformations to
Work, LCPC'16 International Workshop on Languages and
Compilers for Parallel Computers, LNCS 2958, pages 209--225,
College Station, Texas, october 2003.

@item
@anchor{Bas12}[Bas12] C. Bastoul. A Specification and a Library for Data 
Exchange in Polyhedral Compilation Tools. Technical Report,
Paris-Sud University, France, September 2012.

@end itemize

@c % /*************************************************************************
@c %  *                       PART VI: END OF THE DOCUMENT                    *
@c %  *************************************************************************/
@c @unnumbered Index

@c @printindex cp

@bye
